Autonomous Cars: Social
and Economic Implications
One of the major issues with autonomous cars is their
future impact on society as well as on the research
community, academia, and industry. As interest in
autonomous car technology grows, the social and
economic implications of this technology will affect various
stakeholders, including its commercialization. The authors
critically review and analyze both the economic and social
implications of the autonomous car. The signi ﬁcance of these implications will play an
important role in the future of autonomous cars among consumers.
The unexpected growth and interest in autonomous cars over the past decade have attracted the
attention of various stakeholders including the automobile industry, consumers, lawmakers, service
providers, businesses, and governments. Multi-faceted arti ﬁcial intelligence-based sensing, detection,
perception, planning, and actuation techniques are being leveraged in autonomous car design to enable
them to operate without drivers. The main reasons for the interest in computer-controlled self-driving
cars are numerous: safety on the road, growth in population, increase in the number of vehicles, lack of
infrastructure, inef ﬁcient time management and utilization, fuel economy, and environmental
pollution.
To improve traf ﬁc safety and to cope with a few of the afo rementioned challenges, connected
car technology where cars communicate with each other and with their surroundings will play
a pivotal role. Such communication and exchange of information enable drivers to make
correct and timely decisions in emergency situations. However, connected car technology
could not make it to deployment due to the lack of a holistic approach towards infrastructure,
consensus among stakeholders, policies, consumer satisfaction, security, and privacy, to name
a few. Similarly, the ownership of cars poses other serious challenges to traf ﬁc safety in
addition to the need for new infrastructures and resources, and the increase in environmental
pollution.1
According to the World Health Organization, there will be 2 billion vehicles on the roads by
2030.2The exponential increase in the number of vehicles will not only require new
infrastructure but will also increase the probabili ty of accidents and fatalities. To address these
issues, the National Highway Traf ﬁc Safety Administration de ﬁnedﬁve levels of cars from
autonomy and control perspectives, where level 0 has no automation, level 1 refers toRasheed Hussain
JooYoung Lee
Innopolis University
Sherali Zeadally
University of Kentucky
THEME ARTICLE: CONNECTED AND AUTONOMOUS DRIVING
IT Professional
November/December 2018 70Published by the IEEE Computer Society
1520-9202/18/$33.00 /C2232018 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Univ of  Calif San Diego. Downloaded on July 19,2022 at 20:41:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. functional-level automation, level 2 co mbines functional automation, level 3 de ﬁnes the
autonomy of safety-critical functions under some p articular environment, level 4 refers to self-
driving cars with possible human intervention when needed, and level 5 is the fully autonomous
car without any human intervention.3A fully autonomous car is a com plex distributed system
that integrates various computation, comm unication, and storage domains with a focus on
intelligence and capability of decision-making. The “nuts and bolts ”modules of the autonomous
car include object detection, perception, learning, path planning, and execution.
There are numerous applications of the autonomous car, ranging from safety to comfort. Despite the
high complexity of autonomous cars, they are paving the way for new value-added services.
Autonomous cars are poised to substantially reduce the number of road accidents, thereby improving
road safety. Furthermore, with autonomous cars, new business opportunities such as mobility-as-a-
service (where the ownership of cars is expected to reduce) will emerge. This phenomenon will also
help alleviate the parking space problem in urban environments. Furthermore, mobility applications
such as rental cars, taxis, carpooling, social drive, and car-sharing will all bene ﬁt from autonomous
cars.4
To date, remarkable results have been achieved in both academia and industry toward the realization of
autonomous cars, and pilot versions of level 5 autonomous cars have already traveled millions of miles
in test drives. Some of the key market players and investors of autonomous cars include Google
(Waymo), Apple, Intel, Nvidia, Uber, Lyft, Baidu, Honda, nuTonomy, Mercedes, Tesla, BMW, Volvo,
Ford, Volkswagen, Bosch, Delphi, GM, Audi, Toyota, Hyundai, Kia, and many others who are
investing in the commercialization of this technology. However, most of the efforts dedicated to
autonomous cars are focused on the technological aspects.
The idea of the autonomous car is indeed ambitious; however, the consequences and rami ﬁcations of
autonomous cars are gradually emerging as a result of debates that consider the social impact of the
technology. It is still not known as to how society will be affected by the proliferation of this
technology. In this article, we focus on the social and economic implications of autonomous cars and
analyze the existing literature that addresses social and economic issues related to autonomous car
technology.
SOCIAL IMPLICATIONS OF AUTONOMOUS CARS
Autonomous cars are not the future but the present, and the transition to full deployment of
self-driving vehicles (level 5 automation, according to SAE5)o nc i t ys t r e e t sw i l ln o tb es l o w
but sudden. Here, we discuss the social bene ﬁts and ethical and moral issues of autonomous
cars.
Social Bene ﬁts of Autonomous Cars
The promise of safety is the main bene ﬁt that autonomous vehicles are guaranteed to bring.
Advanced driver-assistance system (ADAS), popularly deployed by many manufacturers,
minimize human errors and, therefore, increase road safety. ADAS has many features including
intelligent speed adaptation, hill descent contro l, driver drowsiness detection, and automatic
braking, to name a few. Cars with some of these features are reported to have 14% reduced
property damage liability claims,6whereas autonomous cars will improve operational safety and
avoid human-error-based accidents.
To this end, one of the big changes that the automation of driving will bring is greater accessibility to
public and private transportation. Once full autonomy is implemented, both public and private vehicles
will be driverless. This transition affects various aspects of society including a lower demand for
parking spaces, the inclusion of the disadvantaged, reduced congestion, and improved fuel ef ﬁciency.
Autonomous cars also make car sharing much easier to afford. Past experiences have showed that
many traditional businesses that failed to foresee technical trends disappeared from the market;
therefore, automakers need to redirect their strategies.CONNECTED AND AUTONOMOUS DRIVING
November/December 2018 71 www.computer.org/itpro
Authorized licensed use limited to: Univ of  Calif San Diego. Downloaded on July 19,2022 at 20:41:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. Moral and Ethical Issues
When it comes to making important decisions, humans trust human drivers more than machines. This
distrust stems from different reasons. First, most drivers prefer to have software that prioritize drivers ’
safety over other cars and passengers, while they also want other self-driving cars to have systems that
consider the social and environmental safety. Second, drivers have different decision principles,
especially when it comes to ethical situations. Since enumerating all possible driving scenarios is
infeasible, engineers need to program the systems in advance to follow certain ethical principles.
Traditionally, only humans were allowed to make moral decisions and machines mechanically
followed step-by-step instructions from humans. Now, machines are becoming independent from
humans, yet we do not want to let machines make decisions instead of us. This dilemma can only be
solved when we allow each user to re ﬂect his or her own legitimate ethical principles to the system.
Third, people trust machines less because the information they use to make decisions comes from
(sometimes unreliable) sensor-based perceptions.
From the consumer perspective, the autonomous car will have both positive and negative social
implications. Positive implications include saving time, comfort, safety, prestige, and
improvement in lifestyle, and negative impli cations include distance among social status of
people, moral and ethical challenges, jobs loss for drivers, and addressing human behavior, to
name a few.
ECONOMIC IMPLICATIONS OF AUTONOMOUS CARS
Autonomous cars will rede ﬁne the economic model of many businesses related to the automotive
sector as well as the social well-being of citizens. The world ’s economy can be abstractly divided into
two broad sectors: the service sector that includes major services in our daily lives such as retail,
business, travel, healthcare, and food, and the goods sector that is related to logistics and includes
construction, manufacturing, mining, automotive, etc.3Most of the world ’s economy is shared by
these two sectors. When we put autonomous cars into this perspective, Tien et al. introduced a new
term ( “servgood ”) that refers to a physical tangible good supported by services that make this good
more useful, smarter, adaptive, and customizable.3Furthermore, the addition of more computation and
communication power to servgood results in a more service-rich servgood, henceforth referred to as a
“sensed servgood. ”According to Tien et al. , a nation ’s economy evolves in four stages: mechanical
and electrical (which correspond to the production of goods), and information and Internet (which
correspond to the sensed servgood).7To this end, in addition to other industries, the autonomous car
can be considered as one of the most suitable candidates for sensed servgood that has evolved and
matured over the past decade.
During the past decade, the autonomous car industry has attracted many investors from the automobile
industry, academia, and other businesses. According to the Brookings Institution, around $80 billion
was invested from 2014 to 2017 in different deals (both at business and corporate levels).8Apart from
these investments, Figure 1 presents a summary of the key market players of autonomous cars and
their volume of investments in autonomous car technologies.
The analysis of the economic impact caused by autonomous cars in different industries is also
important. Clements et al.9reviewed different industries that have ﬁrst-hand stakes in autonomous car
technology. Without loss of generality, the automotive industry is directly affected by the emergence of
autonomous cars both positively and negatively. For instance, autonomous cars will reduce the prices
of travel to about $0.57 to $0.74 per mile in the US.10Another strategic shift is expected in the
automotive industry wherein more investments will be made in software and arti ﬁcial intelligence
rather than in the car itself.
Similarly, the software industry will experience signi ﬁcant growth, especially in the ﬁelds of control,
artiﬁcial intelligence, deep learning, and computer vision. The volume of revenue from this aspect of
autonomous cars is estimated to be $26.4 billion in the US, which also contains $680 million to $15.8
billion in software revenue (up to 2040); the revenue in other technologies such as digital mapping
services will reach $10.6 billion by 2040.11Similarly, the health sector will be adversely impacted by
autonomous car technology (from a medical business perspective) because of the reduced rate ofIT PROFESSIONAL
November/December 2018 72 www.computer.org/itpro
Authorized licensed use limited to: Univ of  Calif San Diego. Downloaded on July 19,2022 at 20:41:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. accidents, leading to a reduced rate of hospital visits. Nevertheless, from the user perspective, it will
reduce user expenses.
In short, the autonomous car technology is a double-edged sword. On one hand, it provides enormous
opportunities to industries in the economic sector, whereas on the other hand, it will likely cause a
reduction in revenue for certain industries. More precisely, the paradigm shift will cause some
disruption to the world ’s economy, and there will be both winners and losers. However, after the
autonomous car technology matures, it will add up to $7 trillion to the global economy in different
forms, some of which have already been covered in this work.12
FUTURE CHALLENGES
The mayhem caused by competitors through their relentless pursuit to be pioneers in the
commercialization of autonomous cars has exacerbated, at least to date, the possibilities of its roll-out.
It is also debatable whether the existing test drives can be extrapolated to commercial products. In this
section, we brie ﬂy discuss the social and economic challenges ahead for the autonomous car industry.
Table 1 summarizes some of these challenges.
Social Risks
The desired outcome of a new technology is largely determined by its adoption by its direct
consumers, and most importantly the will for a change in the mindset of the society. Therefore,
innovation involves societal risks. The initial deployment stage of the autonomous car is more
susceptible to errors (or security issues) in software, control, and actuation that may lead to disastrous
circumstances and consequently lose the trust of consumers.
Social risks for autonomous cars can be divided into seven dimensions: user-level risk, system-level
risk,ﬁnancial risk, job market risk, accessibility risk, security and privacy risk, and dependency risk.13
At the user level, in the case of an accident, the consumers of an autonomous car will be at risk (albeit
Figure 1. Investments in and revenue of autonomous cars (https://www.techemergence.com/self-
driving-car-timeline-themselves-top-11-automakers).CONNECTED AND AUTONOMOUS DRIVING
November/December 2018 73 www.computer.org/itpro
Authorized licensed use limited to: Univ of  Calif San Diego. Downloaded on July 19,2022 at 20:41:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. it is the sole motive of autonomous cars to reduce accidents). Furthermore, in the case of autonomous
cars, it is still unclear who will be responsible for different aspects of accidents. At the system level,
this technology is likely to add more risks to the existing infrastructure. In essence, the autonomous car
technology leverages the intelligence of software and likely Internet connectivity (both of which are
susceptible to different security risks). Therefore, should something go wrong with the autonomous
car, the repercussions will be catastrophic for the normal traf ﬁc infrastructure as well.
Insurance With Autonomous Cars
In the current setup, insurance is a well-established business where both cars and humans are insured
through policies. In case of an accident, the primary party responsible and the other liable entities are
typically humans. In the US alone, almost $180 billion was spent in insurance costs, claims, medical
costs, and damages in 2015.14However, the insurance business will likely experience a setback due to
autonomous cars, where a signi ﬁcant shift from the conventional norms in insurance will compel the
industry to rethink its business model. The key question is who will be ensured in the case of an
autonomous car —the car itself, its occupants, or the owner? On the other hand, KPMG forecasted thatTable 1. Summary of challenges for the deployment of autonomous cars.
Risk type Challenges Possible solutions
Social risks Consumer dissatisfaction due
to software errorsIn-depth investigation of
context-aware arti ﬁcial
intelligence-based solutionsLiability in case of accidents
Combination of technology and
legal frameworkLoss of jobs for drivers
Social injustice
Insurance risks What/who to ensure? Paradigm shift of insurance
businessesLoss of current insurance
businesses Role-based liability distribution:
the liability will be distributed
among different stakeholders
such as manufacturer, software
designer, etc.Handling and managing traf ﬁc
incidents will be dif ﬁcult
Economic
obstaclesAutomotive industry will be
badly affected (reduced sales
of cars)Alternate economic bene ﬁts to
citizens (especially drivers)
Decrease in automobile
productionInitial deployment stage must be
managed very carefully
Economic gap among citizens
will increase (drivers will lose
their jobs)Steady deployment of level 5
with huge awareness
campaign
Data-related Data ownership GDPR and similar regulations
issues Data privacy and abuse Implementation of regulations
Data storage and sale Conditional revocation
Type of data to share, with
whom, and to what extent?IT PROFESSIONAL
November/December 2018 74 www.computer.org/itpro
Authorized licensed use limited to: Univ of  Calif San Diego. Downloaded on July 19,2022 at 20:41:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. autonomous car technology will shrink the insurance market by roughly 60%.15Although it is
beneﬁcial to reduce traf ﬁc incidents, the economic repercussions caused by the recession in the
insurance industry is also a problem from the business perspective.
Economic Obstacles
Many existing industries will also be economic obstacles for the autonomous car industry, and the
transition from the traditional mindset of consumers, investors, and business stakeholders might not be
easy. For instance, the automotive industry itself will be adversely affected due to the likely decrease in
their production and the increase in the culture of ride-sharing. From another perspective, the added
beneﬁts brought about by the autonomous car might further increase the economic gap among people
with different social statuses. Currently, this economic gap is reduced by offering jobs such as taxi
drivers, public transport drivers, or personal drivers, but with autonomous cars, it will be dif ﬁcult (at
least at the initial deployment stage) to reduce this gap. On the positive side, it can be inferred that
these obstacles will likely not be permanent and will settle with time because the affected industries
will evolve with new business models that can adapt to the autonomous car technology.
Data-Related Issues in Autonomous Cars
Autonomous cars collect data through various components for identi ﬁcation, authentication, value-
added services, and comfort applications. The term “data is the new oil, ”coined by Clive Humby,
perfectly ﬁts in the context of autonomous cars, where service providers not only have access to
user-identi ﬁable data, but they can also sell it to third parties. Such data not only reveals the private
aspects of individuals ’lives but also reveals patterns that could be used for likes, dislikes, interests,
etc., for business purposes. In many countries, using private information of users and tracking the
location of citizens is protected by laws, but these laws are at odds with the autonomous car
functionality because location information is essential to provide location-based services.
To address such issues through the legal system, the European Union recently introduced and
implemented the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), which gives customers more control
over their personal data. According to GDPR, companies that store customer information have to get
consent from their customers about their data storage and have to inform the customer in case of a data
breach. Furthermore, GDPR enables customers to have the “right to access, ”the“right to be
forgotten, ”“data portability, ”and to exercise privacy by design. As one of the strictest regulations on
personal data protection, GDPR will play a pivotal role in the protection of personal data; however, in
the context of autonomous cars, the service provisions to the customers will have a signi ﬁcant setback
because of the strict consent required from the customers. The service providers need to build enough
trust with customers to get their consent for storing and processing their personal data.
Furthermore, autonomous cars will drastically reduce car ownership, which means that autonomous
cars will be available for rent and for lease. In this case, when the lease is over or when the car is sold
to anyone else, what happens to the data of the previous owner/leaser? Thus, there are still gray areas
even in the legislation that needs to be addressed. Intel Corporation predicted that an autonomous car
could generate 4000 gigabytes of data every single day16from its on-board sensors. If such data is
misused by the service providers, it can lead to catastrophic consequences. Given that changes to the
legislation take time and can be quite complex, both legal systems and technologies (such as
blockchain) are essential to address the aforementioned issues.
CONCLUSION
Competition in the autonomous car industry has motivated competitors to develop novel solutions, but
it has also led to the emergence of social and economic issues from both consumer and business
perspectives. In this paper, we discussed the social and economic implications of autonomous cars and
make the following conclusions.
/C15Autonomous car technology will have signi ﬁcant societal implications (both positive and
negative). To realize a commercial autonomous car, the industry, governments, lawmakers,CONNECTED AND AUTONOMOUS DRIVING
November/December 2018 75 www.computer.org/itpro
Authorized licensed use limited to: Univ of  Calif San Diego. Downloaded on July 19,2022 at 20:41:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. and academia must take concrete steps to address the challenges that directly affect
consumers.
/C15The stakeholders must develop effective rules, regulations, and laws that safeguard the
interests of consumers and businesses.
/C15There will be no absolute winners or losers in the commercialization of the autonomous car.
Different stakeholders need to agree on some consensus.
/C15We anticipate that as autonomous cars are commercialized and the technology matures, there
will be more social and economic issues that will need to be addressed.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank the anonymous reviewers and the editor for their valuable comments.
REFERENCES
1. J. Contreras-Castillo, S. Zeadally, and J. A. Ibanez, “Solving vehicular ad hoc network
challenges with big data solutions, ”IET Netw. , vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 81 –84, 2016.
2.“Road traf ﬁc death rate by WHO region and income level, ”Geneva, Switzerland:
World Health Org. Available at: http://www .who.int/gho/road_safety/mortality/
trafﬁc_deaths_rates/en, 2013.
3. J. M. Tien, “The sputnik of servgoods: Autonomous vehicles, ”J. Syst. Sci. Syst. Eng. ,
vol. 26, pp. 133 –162, 2017.
4. Z. Ning et al. ,“Vehicular social networks: Enabling smart mobility, ”IEEE Commun. Mag. ,
vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 49 –55, May 2017.
5. T. Inagaki and T. B. Sheridan, “A critique of the SAE conditional driving automation
deﬁnition, and analyses of options for improvement, ”Cogn., Technol. Work ,p p .1 –10,
Feb. 2018.
6. M. Kyriakidis et al. ,“The deployment of advanced driver assistance systems in Europe, ”
SSRN, 2015. Available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id ¼2559034
7. J. M. Tien and D. Berg, “A case for service systems engineering, ”J. Syst. Sci. Syst. Eng. ,
vol. 12, pp. 13 –38, 2003.
8. C. F. Kerry and J. Karsten, “Gauging investment in self-driving cars, ”Brookings Inst.,
Washington, D.C., USA, Oct. 2017. Available at: https://www.brookings.edu/research/
gauging-investment-in-self-driving-cars
9. L. M. Clements and K. M. Kockelman, “Economic effects of automated vehicles, ”Transp.
Res. Record, J. Transp. Res. Board , vol. 2606, pp. 106 –114, 2017.
10. E. Edmonds, “Your driving costs, ”Amer. Autom. Assoc., Heathrow, FL, USA, Sep. 13,
2018. Available at: https://newsroom.aaa.com/auto/your-driving-costs
11.“Google self-driving car strategy and implications, ”IHS Automotive, Sep. 2015. Available
at: https://supplierinsight.ihsmarkit.com/_assets/sampledownloads/auto-tech-report-google-
self-driving-car-strategy-and-implications-september-2015-sample_1443438497.pdf
12. A. Marshall, “Robocars could Add $7 trillion to the global economy, ”Wired , Jun. 3, 2017.
Available at: https://www.wired.com/2017/06/impact-of-autonomous-vehicles
13. A. Grunwald, “Societal risk constellations for aut onomous driving: Analysis, historical
context and assessment, ”inAutonomous Driving: Technical, Legal and Social Aspects ,
M. Maurer et al. , Eds., New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2016, pp. 641 –663.
14. K. C. Desouza et al. ,“Local government 2035: Strategic trends and implications of new
technologies, ”Issues in Technology Innovation, no. 27, 2015. Available at: https://www.
brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/desouza.pdf
15.“Automobile insurance in the era of autonomous vehicles, ”KPMG, 2015. Available at:
https://assets.kpmg.com/content/dam/kpmg/pdf/2016/06/id-market-place-of-change-
automobile-insurance-in-the-era-of-autonomous-vehicles.pdf
16. B. Krzanich, “Data is the new oil in the future of automated driving, ”Intel, Nov. 15, 2016.
Available at: https://newsroom.intel.com/editorials/krzanich-the-future-of-automated-
drivingIT PROFESSIONAL
November/December 2018 76 www.computer.org/itpro
Authorized licensed use limited to: Univ of  Calif San Diego. Downloaded on July 19,2022 at 20:41:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Rasheed Hussain is an Assistant Professor and Coordinator of MS in secure system
and network engineering with Innopolis University, Innopolis, Russia. His research
interests include information security, privacy, applied cryptography, vehicular networks,
vehicular clouds and social networks, Internet of Things, blockchain, and future Internet
architecture. He received the Ph.D. degree in computer science and engineering from
Hanyang University, Seoul, South Korea. Contact him at r.hussain@innopolis.ru.
JooYoung Lee is an Assistant Professor with Innopolis University, Innopolis, Russia. Her
research interests include game theory, social network analysis, trust and reputation
management, vehicular social networks, algorithmic graph theory, and Internet of Things.
She received the Ph.D. degree from Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY, USA. Contact
her at j.lee@innopolis.ru.
Sherali Zeadally is an Associate Professor with the University of Kentucky, Lexington,
KY, USA. His research interests include cybersecurity, privacy, Internet of Things, and
energy-ef ﬁcient networking. He received the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the
University of Buckingham, Buckingham, U.K. He is a Fellow of the British Computer
Society and a Fellow of the Institution of Engineering Technology, U.K. Contact him at
szeadally@uky.edu.
November/December 2018 77 www.computer.org/itproCONNECTED AND AUTONOMOUS DRIVING
Authorized licensed use limited to: Univ of  Calif San Diego. Downloaded on July 19,2022 at 20:41:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 