Santa Clara Law R eview
Volume 52 |Numbe r 4 Article 6
12-17-2012
The C omin g Collision B etwee n Aut onomou s
Vehicles a nd the Li ability System
Gary E. Marchant
Rachel A. Lindor
Follow thi s and a dditional w orks at:http://d igitalcommon s.law.scu.edu/l awreview
Part of the Law C ommon s
This Ar ticle i s brought to you for f ree and ope n access by the J ournals at Santa Clara Law Di gital C ommon s. It has be en accepted for inclusion in S anta
Clara Law R eview by an author ized admini strator of S anta Clara Law Di gital C ommon s. For mor e infor mation, p lease contact
sculawlibrarian@gm ail.com.Recomme nded Citation
52 S anta Clara L. Rev. 1321MARCHANT FINAL 11/14/2012  12:42  AM 
 
1321  THE COMING COLLISION BETWEEN 
AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES AND THE LIABILITY 
SYSTEM 
Gary E. Marchant* and Rachel A. Lindor** 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
Introduction 
I.  Liability Doctrine an d Relevant Precedents 
II.  Who Will Be Held Liable? 
III.  Relative Risk Issues 
IV.  Legal and Policy Protections 
A. Assumption of Risk Defense 
B. Legislative Protections 
C. State Preemption 
Conclusion 
INTRODUCTION  
Cars crash.  So too will autonomous vehicles, a new 
generation of vehicles under development that are capable of 
operating on roadways without direct human control.1  A  
critical factor with respect to the feasibility of such vehicles is how often and with what  severity such crashes will occur.  If 
autonomous vehicles have statis tically more, or more severe, 
accidents than standard cars, then such vehicles will not be legally viable for widespread use.  Judges and juries will 
 
 * Gary E. Marchant is a Regents’ Professor, a Lincoln Professor of 
Emerging Technologies, a Law & Ethics Professor, and the Faculty Director of 
the Center for Law, Science & Innovation at the Sandra Day O’Connor College of Law, Arizona State University.   
 ** Rachel A. Lindor is a graduate of the Sandra Day O’Connor College of 
Law at Arizona State University, Research Director of the Center for Law, Science & Innovation at the College of Law, and is currently completing her 
M.D. at the Mayo Medical School. 
 1. See generally  Matthew Michaels Moore & Beverly Lu, Autonomous 
Vehicles for Personal Transport: A Technology Assessment , (Social Science 
Research Network, Working Paper, 2011), available at  http://www.pickar. 
caltech.edu/e103/Final%20Exams/Autonomous%20Vehicles%20for%20Personal%20Transport.pdf. MARCHANT FINAL 11/14/2012   12:42  AM 
1322 SANTA CLARA LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 52 
likely treat a vehicle manufacturer who has substituted a 
riskier autonomous vehicle for a safer conventional vehicle 
harshly. 
On the other hand, if autonomous vehicles reduce the 
frequency and/or severity of accidents, liability will still be an important and potentially limiting consideration for 
manufacturers.  Liability, in that case, requires an analysis of 
three key factors.  First, who will be liable?  Second, what weight will the court’s finder of fact give to the overall 
comparative safety of autonomous vehicles when determining 
whether those involved in a crash should be held liable?  Third, will a vehicle “defect” that creates potential 
manufacturer liability be found in a higher percentage of 
crashes than with conventional vehicle crashes where driver error is usually attributed to be the cause?  Depending on the 
answers to these questions, liability has the potential to 
present a significant deterrent to the development of autonomous vehicles, even though such vehicles would 
provide an overall safety benefi t relevant to today’s driver-
controlled cars. 
This Article assesses the potential interactions between 
legal liability and autonomous vehicles.  It begins in Section I 
with a discussion of the relevant liability doctrine and precedents from other technologies that may indicate how 
judges and juries are likely to allocate liability for 
autonomous vehicle crashes.
2  Section II then examines who 
might be held liable for an autonomous vehicle crash.3  
Section III assesses the relative risk issues that are likely to 
be the key determinants of liability.4  Finally, Section IV 
discusses some potential liability protections available to 
manufacturers.5  These include the assumption of risk 
defense, potential legislative interventions limiting liability, and federal preemption of state tort claims. 
I. L
IABIITY DOCTRINE AND RELEVANT PRECEDENTS  
There are two key doctrinal issues in determining tort 
liability for personal injury.  Fi rst is the theory of liability. 
 
2. See infra  notes 6–19 and accompanying text. 
 3. See infra  notes 20–31 and accompanying text. 
 4. See infra  notes 32–56 and accompanying text. 
 5. See infra  notes 57–74 and accompanying text. MARCHANT FINAL 11/14/2012   12:42  AM 
2012] AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES & LIABILITY  1323 
Potential theories of liability include negligence, strict 
liability, and breach of implied warranty of merchantability.  In the context of automotive crash injuries, negligence and 
strict liability are the two most common theories, usually 
raised in the alternative by plaintiffs.  A negligence claim considers the reasonableness of the defendant’s actions, 
usually measured in terms of industry standard of care or a 
cost-benefit analysis.  Strict li ability, in contrast, historically 
was intended to apply liability to a party that caused the 
injury, regardless of fault.  Co urts, however, have retreated 
from applying strict liability in its absolute form, instead tempering it with some sort of reasonableness consideration 
in most applications.  To that extent, the standard for strict 
liability begins to converge with  the standard for negligence, 
and thus the two are considered together in the discussion of 
defects and liability that follows below.
6 
The second issue in determining liability is the type of 
defect in the product which gives rise to the liability.  The 
Restatement (Third) of Torts states that product liability 
requires that a product must be found to have at least one of three categories of “defect” before liability can be imposed.
7  
The first category is a manufacturing defect, where the 
product “departs from its intended design even though all possible care was exercised in the preparation and marketing 
of the product.”
8  This first category of defect is unlikely to 
apply very often to autonomo us vehicles, since modern 
manufacturing methods, especially for critical components of 
autonomous vehicles such as the software and navigation 
systems, can be manufactured with  low error rates.  A second 
category of potential defect is  a failure to provide adequate 
instructions or warnings, which applies “when the foreseeable 
risks of harm posed by the product could have been reduced or avoided by the provision of reasonable instructions or 
warnings . . . and the omission of the instructions or warnings 
renders the product not reasonably safe.”
9  Most jurisdictions 
limit this duty to warn of risks that could be “reasonably” 
known at the time of sale.  The manufacturer of an 
 
 6. The one difference is in manufacturing defects, discussed below, which 
does apply a true strict liability standard. 
 7. R ESTATEMENT (THIRD ) OF TORTS : PRODUCT LIABILITY  § 2 (1997). 
 8. Id. § 2(a). 
 9. Id. § 2(c). MARCHANT FINAL 11/14/2012   12:42  AM 
1324 SANTA CLARA LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 52 
autonomous vehicle may, therefore, have a duty to disclose 
known risks of failure, including any known or suspected failure modes.  Since the manufacturer of an autonomous 
vehicle will seek to engineer out, or at least understand, any 
risks involved in the vehicle, system or component failure, the required warnings should be quite limited.  As such, the duty 
to disclose those risks should be relatively easily discharged 
in most cases. 
The third and most significant type of defect for 
autonomous vehicles, as with many products, is a design 
defect.  The standard for a design defect is that “the foreseeable risks of harm posed by the product could have 
been reduced or avoided by the adoption of a reasonable 
alternative design . . . and the omission of the alternative design renders the product not reasonably safe.”
10  This is 
called the “risk-utility test.”11  An alternative test, called the 
“consumer expectation test,”12 inquires what level of safety a 
reasonable consumer would expect from the product in 
question; yet this test is losing favor in many states, and is 
generally considered particularly inapplicable in cases involving the analysis of technical and scientific 
information.
13 
Autonomous vehicles have not yet been commercially 
deployed.  Not surprisingly, there has not been any reported 
personal injury litigation regarding these products to date.  
There are, however, a number of analogous technologies that have been the subject of litigation.  These cases may provide 
some useful hints as to how courts and juries are likely to 
apply the product liability doctri ne to autonomous vehicles.
14  
Industrial robots, for example, have played a role in a large 
number of employee injuries, resulting in the robots’ 
manufacturers being named in a number of subsequent lawsuits.  Though most incidents appear to be attributed to 
 
 10. Id. § 2(b). 
 11. Aaron D. Twerski & James A. Henderson, Jr., Manufacturers’ Liability 
for Defective Product Designs: The Triumph of Risk-Utility , 74 B ROOK . L. REV. 
1061, 1065 (2009).  12. Douglas A. Kysar, The Expectations of Consumers , 103 C
OLUM . L. REV. 
1700 (2003). 
 13. E.g. , Montag v. Honda Motor Co.,  Inc., 75 F.3d 1414 (10th Cir. 1996). 
 14. For additional discussion of such liability, see M. Ryan Calo, Open 
Robotics , 70 M D. L. REV. 571, 594–600 (2011). MARCHANT FINAL 11/15/2012   9:01  PM 
2012] AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES & LIABILITY  1325 
the employees’ failures to take proper safety precautions15 or 
employees’ decisions to disable available safety features of the machines,
16 these cases highlight manufacturers’ 
vulnerability to lawsuits in accidents involving their 
products. 
The dozens of suits brought against car manufacturers 
for accidents attributed to the cars’ cruise control systems are 
more relevant to autonomous ve hicles.  Plaintiffs are often 
successful in alleging17 that the cruise control systems caused 
the cars to unexpectedly accele rate and fail to respond to 
braking.18 
Finally, airplanes capable of flying on “autopilot” (while 
also manned by a live pilot) provide a close analogy to 
autonomous vehicles.  At least one case involving a collision of an auto-piloted plane has been litigated.  While the plane 
that was controlled by autopilot was found to be the cause of 
the collision with another plane, the court attributed the error to the pilot rather than the design of the autopilot 
feature of the plane, with the judge opining that, “[t]he 
obligation of those in charge of a plane under robot control to keep a proper and constant lookout is unavoidable.”
19  
Whether these cases will have any relevance to the courts’ 
treatment of emerging autono mous vehicle technology is 
difficult to predict. 
 
 
 15. See, e.g. , Payne v. ABB Flexible Automation , Inc., 116 F.3d 480 (8th Cir. 
1997), in which employee was fatally injured by a robot used to construct 
automobile wheels after he failed to comp ly with safety measures requiring him 
to “lock out” the robot and to slow the spee d of the robot before entering its ‘cell.’ 
 16. See, e.g. , Edens v. Bellini, 597 S.E.2d 863 (S.C. Ct. App. 2004), in which 
employee was fatally injured by a robotic shuttle used to transport wool, after 
the robot’s operator disabled the pressure -sensitive safety mats that signaled 
the robot to stop automatically if they were triggered by someone stepping on 
them.  17. See, e.g. , Cole v. Ford Motor, Co ., 900 P.2d 1059 (Or. Ct. App. 1995) 
(explaining that the jury awarded $375,000 to plaintiff whose car allegedly 
accelerated when the driver pushed the brake pedal, causing the driver to lose control and crash into a guard rail). 
 18. See, e.g. , Watson v. Ford Motor Co., 699 S.E.2d 169 (S.C. 2010); Ashley 
v. Gen. Motors Corp., 666 So.2d 1320 (L a. Ct. App. 1996); Lawrence v. Gen. 
Motors Corp., 73 F.3d 587 (5th Cir. 1996). 
 19. Brouse v. U.S., 83 F. Supp. 373, 374 (N.D. Ohio 1949). MARCHANT FINAL 11/14/2012   12:42  AM 
1326 SANTA CLARA LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 52 
II. W HO WILL BE HELD LIABLE ? 
In a conventional vehicle crash, the accident is usually 
attributable to one of, or a combination of, three primary 
possible causes: (i) the driver; (ii) a vehicle malfunction or defect; and/or (iii) unavoidable natural conditions (weather, 
road conditions, animal on the road, etc).  Any liability is 
usually allocated to one or both of the first two potential causes—the driver and the vehicle manufacturer.  In a multi-
vehicle crash, there may be two or more drivers and vehicle 
manufacturers involved, each of which could potentially be at fault in whole or in part, and therefore, potentially liable.
20 
Autonomous vehicles are likely to change the dynamics of 
who may be held liable.  In considering these changes, it is first necessary to distinguish partial autonomous vehicles 
from completely autonomous vehicles.  A partially 
autonomous vehicle could involve a range of various safety systems, such as a warning system that alerts the driver 
when the vehicle strays out of its lane or a collision avoidance 
systems that slows or stops th e vehicle before it contacts 
another vehicle or object.
21  These partial autonomous 
systems will shift some, but not all, of the responsibility for 
accident avoidance from the driver to the vehicle, presumably reducing the risk of accidents (since that is the very purpose 
of the system).  With a fully autonomous vehicle, however, the 
responsibility for avoiding an accident shifts entirely to the vehicle and the components of its accident avoidance systems. 
The liability implications of an accident that results from 
a failure of a vehicle’s accident avoidance system will be similar, regardless of whether the vehicle is partially or fully 
autonomous.  When the driver has a choice to turn on the 
autonomous system and exercised that choice negligently, the apportionment of responsibility  between the car and driver 
 
 20. In a study mandated by Congress of 5471 car accidents, the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Admi nistration (NHTSA) found that 30.8% of accidents 
involved a single vehicle, 57.2% involved two vehicles, and 12% involved three or more vehicles.    U.S.
 DEP’T OF TRANSP ., DOT  HS 811 059 NATIONAL MOTOR 
VEHICLE CRASH CAUSATION SURVEY : REPORT TO CONGRESS  17 (2008). 
 21. See  NIDHI KALRA ET AL ., LIABILITY AND REGULATION OF AUTONOMOUS 
VEHICLE TECHNOLOGIES  3–4 (2009) (California PATH  Research Report UCB-
ITS-PRR-2009-28); Sven A. Beiker,  Legal Aspects of Autonomous Driving , 52 
SANTA CLARA L. REV. 1145 (2010) (Report for the Center for Automotive 
Research at Stanford (CARS), Stanford University); Moore & Lu, supra  note 1, 
at 6–8. MARCHANT FINAL 11/14/2012   12:42  AM 
2012] AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES & LIABILITY  1327 
may be more difficult.  For example, if the instruction manual 
instructed the owner not to use the autonomous vehicle in certain weather conditions, or on specific types of traffic 
patterns, but the owner does so anyway, the driver may be 
held at least partially at fault.  Similarly, if the driver failed to utilize, or was negligent in utilizing an available over-ride 
mechanism to assume control of the vehicle,
22 he or she may 
be allocated some or all of the blame for a resulting accident.  In most cases though, especially those involving a dedicated 
and totally autonomous vehicle, the driver is unlikely to be a 
factor in the liability determination. 
Because drivers are found to be at fault in a large 
majority of current automobile accidents,
23 removing the 
driver from the liability equation in autonomous vehicles will have important implications.  Of  course, by removing driver 
error as a factor, the frequency of accidents should go down, 
which is one of the key potential benefits of an autonomous vehicle in the first place.  When an accident does occur 
though, the vehicle manufacturer, or some other party 
involved in the design, manufacture, or operation of the autonomous vehicle is likely to be held liable for a higher 
proportion of the accidents.  This will be more likely to occur 
with autonomous vehicles than it currently does with conventional vehicles.
24  In other words, when an autonomous 
vehicle does crash, most likel y something went wrong with 
 
 22. Moore & Lu, supra  note 1, at 8 (discussing switchable on-and-off 
autonomous control system). 
 23. In the National Motor Vehicle Crash Causation Survey, NHTSA found 
that driver factors was the primary cause of the accident in 5096 of 5471 
accidents studied, whereas vehicle problems were the primary cause of 130 
accidents, and road conditio ns or weather conditions were the primary cause of 
135 accidents.  U.S.  DEP’T OF TRANSP ., supra  note 20, at 23–26. 
 24. D.  RANDAL AYERS , VA. TRANSP . RESEARCH COUNCIL , VTRC  94-R6,  TORT 
REFORM AND “SMART ” HIGHWAYS : ARE LIABILITY CONCERNS IMPEDING THE 
DEVELOPMENT OF COST-EFFECTIVE INTELLIGENT VEHICLE -HIGHWAY SYSTEMS ? 
26–27 (1994), available at  http://ntl.bts.gov/DOCS/ayers.html.  There are two 
primary theories by which a vehicle manufacturer can be held liable for a vehicle accident.  The first, and the one most relevant here, is that a “defect” in 
a vehicle caused or substantially contributed to the accident.  The second 
theory, which may not be appreciably different for conventional and autonomous vehicles, is that deficiencies in the vehicle’s “crashworthiness” 
result in greater injuries from an accident than should have resulted.  See 
Haberkorn v. Chrysler Corp., 533 N. W.2d 373, 379–80 (Mic h. App. Ct. 1995) 
(holding vehicle manufacturer had the duty to design its product to eliminate 
any unreasonable risk of foreseeable injury as a result of a collision). MARCHANT FINAL 11/14/2012   12:42  AM 
1328 SANTA CLARA LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 52 
the collision avoidance system or the vehicle encountered 
conditions that it was not adequately programmed to address.
25  Unlike a conventional vehicle crash, where the 
vehicle malfunction involves some sort of defect, such as a tire 
blowout or gas tank explosion, the malfunction in an autonomous vehicle will usually be a programming error or 
system failure that could implicate several different 
potentially liable parties.
26 
If an autonomous vehicle malfunctioned and caused an 
accident, one or more of several entities could be held liable.27  
The list of potential parties includes the vehicle manufacturer, the manufacturer of a component used in the 
autonomous system, the software engineer who programmed 
the code for the autonomous operation of the vehicle, and the road designer in the case of an intelligent road system that 
helps control the vehicle.
28  The various component parts and 
their respective roles in causin g a malfunction may be hard to 
discern and separate for the purpose of assigning 
responsibility.29  In most cases, it will be the vehicle 
manufacturer who will, for both practical and doctrinal reasons, be the party held liable for a crash involving an 
 
 25. See  Moore & Lu, supra  note 1 (discussing that the greatest impediments 
to autonomous vehicles is decision-making under conditions of uncertainty and operating the vehicle safely under unusual weather and environmental 
conditions). 
 26. See Beiker,  supra  note 21, at 1152 (“As the vehicle navigates itself 
through traffic, it makes ‘mission-critical’  decisions, which, in a narrow range of 
circumstances, can and will contribute to accidents.  Such an event cannot 
necessarily be classified as a technica l failure, however, the same way as, for 
instance, a damaged tire.”). 
 27. See  Mark H. Chignell et al., The Principles of Caveat Vendor, Caveat 
Emptor and Caveat Operator in Robotic Safety , 8 J.
 OCCUPATIONAL ACCIDENTS  
79, 83 (1986) (discussing possible liable parties in accident caused by 
autonomous system generally). 
 28. This list assumes that the driver is not liable because it had no direct control over the functioning of the autonomous vehicle. 
 29. Wendell Wallach, From Robots to Techno Sapiens: Ethics, Law and 
Public Policy in the Development of Robotics and Neurotechnologies , 3 L
AW, 
INNOVATION & TECH. 185, 194 (2011); Calo, supra  note 14, at 597 (“It is 
extremely difficult to discover whether software, as opposed to hardware, is 
responsible for the glitch that led to an a ccident.”).  An additional complexity is 
that a truly autonomous system self-teaches new behaviors based on 
experience.  Thus, the vehicle may act based on such self-learning to cause an 
accident that may have been inconsistent with the initial programming for which the manufacturer was responsible.  See Robert Sparrow, Killer Robots , 24 
J.
 APPLIED PHIL. 62, 70 (2007). MARCHANT FINAL 11/14/2012   12:42  AM 
2012] AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES & LIABILITY  1329 
autonomous vehicle.30  The practical argument is that the 
vehicle manufacturer will usually have the “deep pockets” that the injured plaintiff will seek to target.  From a doctrinal 
perspective, the vehicle manufacturer, as the party ultimately 
responsible for the final product, will be the most likely party to be found liable.  For example, the manufacturer of a 
component part is not liable fo r defects in the final product 
over which it had no control, although it is liable if the part was defective when the component left the manufacturer.  A 
similar rule is likely to apply to the software engineer.
31  So, 
unless the component part or software engineer produced a product that was clearly defective, the vehicle manufacturer 
will be the party most likely to be fingered for liability, 
although there will likely be cases where other parties are sued. 
One other dynamic that may be different in autonomous 
vehicle crashes is the “who is liable” category in the context of multi-vehicle crashes.  In conventional vehicle accidents, an 
injured person usually sues the manufacturer of his or her 
own vehicle for failing to provide a crashworthy vehicle.  There are scenarios where the first driver’s vehicle 
malfunctions and causes the accident, in which the second 
driver may sue the manufacturer of the first vehicle for any injuries incurred as a result of the accident.  But those 
scenarios tend to be the minority in conventional crash 
cases—most of the time an injured driver is suing the manufacture of his or her own vehicle.  In a crash between 
two or more vehicles—where at least one vehicle is an 
autonomous vehicle, and a malfunction or ill-advised 
 
 30. For example, the manufacturer of a component is largely protected from 
liability for failure to warn when it is integrated into a sophisticated product.  
See RESTATEMENT (THIRD ) OF TORTS : PRODUCT LIABILITY  § 5 cmt. b (1997) 
(“The component seller is required to provide instructions and warnings regarding risks associated with the use of  the component product. . . .  However, 
when a sophisticated buyer integrates a component into another product, the 
component seller owes no duty to warn either the immediate buyer or ultimate 
consumers of dangers arising because the component is unsuited for the special 
purpose to which the buyer puts it.”). 
 31. Computer programming is a service rather than a product, and thus the actions of a computer programmer will be evaluated under a negligence or 
malpractice standard rather than under pr oducts liability.  Frances E. Zollers et 
al., No More Soft Landings for Software: Liability for Defects in an Industry 
T h a t  H a s  C o m e  o f  A g e , 21 S
ANTA CLARA COMPUTER & HIGH TECH. L.J. 745 
(2005). MARCHANT FINAL 11/14/2012   12:42  AM 
1330 SANTA CLARA LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 52 
maneuver by that vehicle al legedly contributed to the 
accident—all injured persons in the accident are likely to sue the manufacturer of the autonomous vehicle. 
III. R
ELATIVE RISK ISSUES  
Relative risk issues are likely to be the most important 
variables affecting the liability exposure of autonomous 
vehicles, and consequently, their economic viability.32  These 
relative risk issues apply in se veral layers.  The first layer is 
the threshold question of whether autonomous vehicles will 
increase or decrease the frequency and severity of vehicle collisions.  One of the key drivers pushing the development of 
autonomous vehicles is improved safety.  It is therefore 
presumed that an autonomous vehicle would be safer than a conventional vehicle.
33  If, to the contrary, an autonomous 
vehicle raised net accident risk s, it would likely not be viable 
for widespread use.  A manufacturer that substitutes a riskier product for a safer produc t will generally expose itself 
to lawsuits and runaway liability. 
Thus, absent exceptional circumstances or applications, 
autonomous vehicles will only be viable if they are safer than 
the conventional vehicles they replace.  This follows from the 
presumption that safety is one of the primary motivating objectives of creating autonomous vehicles.  As a New York 
Times  story noted, “[r]obot drivers react faster than humans, 
have 360-degree perception and do not get distracted, sleepy or intoxicated . . . .”
34  But even if the autonomous vehicles are 
safer overall, compared to conventional vehicles, they will 
still be subject to liability when malfunctions or other failures result in accidents and associated injuries.  Most accidents 
involving an autonomous vehicle will be the result of the 
autonomous system failing, because, as discussed above, there will not be a driver to blame for the accident.
35 
 
 32. Relative risk is the ratio of the risk  in the population of  interest (in this 
case autonomous vehicles) divided by the risk in the background or control population (in this case, conventional non-autonomous vehicles).  See Michael D. 
Green, Expert Witnesses and Sufficiency of Evidence in Toxic Substances 
Litigation: The Legacy of Agent Orange and Bendectin Litigation , 86 N
W. U. L. 
REV. 643, 647 (1992). 
 33. See  Moore & Lu, supra  note 1, at 3–4. 
 34. John Markoff, Google Cars Drive Themselves, in Traffic , N.Y.  TIMES , 
Oct. 9, 2010, at A1. 
 35. Of course there will be some accidents involving autonomous vehicles MARCHANT FINAL 11/14/2012   12:42  AM 
2012] AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES & LIABILITY  1331 
There are many examples of products that have a net 
safety benefit that are still subject to liability when an injury results.  The litigation against vaccine manufacturers, for 
example, clearly illustrates this paradox.  The public health 
benefit of vaccines is undeniable, yet they are so frequently the source of lawsuits that federal preemption laws had to be 
passed to protect their manufacturers.
36  Even with these 
protections in place, vaccine manufacturers continue to be held liable for the rare instan ces in which their products 
cause injuries that do not fall within the protections of the 
federal legislation.
37  Automobile manufacturers have faced 
similar liability threats after incorporating various features 
designed to improve the safety of their automobiles, such as 
anti-lock braking systems38 and airbags.39  General Motors, 
for example, was sued by a woman and her family after the 
passenger-side airbags in their vehicle failed to deploy in a 
collision with an eighteen-wheeler, resulting in permanent and severe injuries to the woman.
40  D e s p i t e  t h e  f a c t  t h a t  
passenger-side airbags were not required by the National 
Highway Transportation Safety Commission at the time, the jury found the airbags to be defective and awarded the 
woman and her family $18.5 million in damages.
41 
Although the overall safety benefit of autonomous 
vehicles will not provide a complete liability shield, 
manufacturers of such products may be able to use this safety 
benefit in their defense.  In many product liability cases, the 
manufacturer defends the safety of its product, and the 
plaintiffs attack its riskiness—by comparing the product to 
 
that are the fault of the driver of the other vehicle, assuming it is not 
autonomous.  This also assumes that the vehicle is fully autonomous and the 
passenger had no way to override the autonomous system, or that the vehicle was partially autonomous but the driver was not negligent in his or her failure 
to prevent or mitigate the autonomous system’s error. 
 36. National Childhood Vaccine Inju ry Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 300aa-1–300aa-34 
(1986). 
 37. See, e.g. , Strong v. Am. Cyanamid Co.,  261 S.W.3d 493 (Mo. Ct. App. 
2007) (upholding a jury’s $8.5 million ve rdict to a consumer who contracted 
paralytic polio from an oral polio vaccine). 
 38. Baluchinsky v. Gen. Motors Corp ., 670 N.Y.S.2d 536 (App. Div. 1998). 
 39. See, e.g. , Morton International v. Gillespie, 39 S.W.3d 651 (Tex. Ct. App. 
2001) (affirming trial court’s $950,000 award to a woman who was injured when 
the deployment of her airbag was delayed during an accident); Gen. Motors 
Corp. v. Burry, 203 S.W.3d 514 (Tex. Ct. App. 2006).  40. See Gen. Motors Corp. , 203 S.W.3d 514. 
 41. Id. MARCHANT FINAL 11/14/2012   12:42  AM 
1332 SANTA CLARA LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 52 
alternative designs and competing products on the market.  
An example is the defense by General Motors (“GM”) of its C/K pickup in a series of lawsuits in the 1990s.
42  Plaintiffs in 
these suits alleged that GM’s placement of the gas tank on 
the side of the model, outside the vehicle frame, created an increased risk of fatal fires afte r side impacts.  GM attempted 
to defend the safety of its vehicle with comparative analyses, 
contending that the overall crashworthiness of its vehicles was better than most vehicles on the road.  GM further 
argued that even if its vehicl es were prone to a slightly 
increased risk of fire fatalities from side impacts on the side with the gas tank, they had an equivalent or lower rate of 
fatalities and fire fatalities from all types of accidents.
43  
There is an inevitable trade-off in the placement of the gas tank—putting the gas tank in one location (e.g., side of 
vehicle) increases the fire risk from impacts in that region of 
the vehicle, but also decreases the risks from impacts in other regions where the tank could ha ve been located, but was not 
(e.g., the rear of vehicle).
44  This argument of overall superior 
safety was largely ineffective wi th juries, as they returned 
adverse verdicts against GM, including large punitive 
damages awards.45 
Parties have also attempted to use comparative risk 
evidence in all-terrain vehicle (“ATV”) litigation.  The courts 
generally exclude the defendant from introducing 
comparative risk data showing the relative safety of ATVs 
compared to other recreational activities, such as riding 
snowmobiles and motorcycles, on the basis that such 
comparative risk evidence is irrelevant and unduly 
 
 42. E.g. , Gen. Motors Corp. v. Moseley, 447 S.E.2d 302 (Ga. Ct. App. 1994).  
See Terence Moran, GM Burns Itself , AM. LAW., Apr. 1993, at 68–83. 
 43. G ENERAL MOTORS , EVALUATION OF THE SAFETY OF GM  1973-87  C/K  
PICKUP TRUCKS , PART I: INITIAL RESPONSE OF THE GENERAL MOTORS 
CORPORATION TO NHTSA  LETTER OF APRIL 9, 1993  (Apr. 30, 1993) (copy on file 
with author); Moran, supra  note 42, at 69, 78. 
 44. Walter Olson, The Most Dangerous Vehicle on the Road , WALL ST. J., 
Feb. 9, 1993, at A16, available at  http://walterolson.com/articles/gmtrucks.html 
(“Any possible placement of the fuel tank ‘causes’ some accidents and averts 
others.  Respectable designers have tried every gas-tank location at one time or another . . . . All have been rejected at other times as unsafe.”). 
 45. Moran, supra  note 42, at 81; Sam LaManna, GM Verdict Could Affect 
Future Cases , N
AT’L L.J., May 3, 1993, at 21, 25; GM v. Moseley, 447 S.E.2d 
302, 305 (Ga. App. Ct. 1994).  Jury awar ded $101 million in punitive damages 
against GM.  Id. MARCHANT FINAL 11/14/2012   12:42  AM 
2012] AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES & LIABILITY  1333 
prejudicial.46  In cases where the plaintiff “opened the door” to 
such evidence by introducing repo rts on the statistical risks of 
ATVs, however, the defendant was permitted to introduce its 
comparative risk evidence to impeach the plaintiff’s evidence 
and to argue against punitive damages.47  Such comparative 
risk evidence, when allowed, seems to be effective for the 
defendant.  Plaintiffs appealed (unsuccessfully) a verdict in 
their own favor, in at least one instance, to challenge the introduction of comparative risk  information on rebuttal.  The 
plaintiffs presumably concluded that the comparative risk 
evidence substantially reduced their recovery.
48 
An autonomous vehicle manufacturer could, therefore, 
try to defend its vehicle in court by demonstrating that the 
vehicle is safer overall than the conventional vehicles it replaces.  This argument is likely to be unsuccessful when an 
accident was caused by a clear defect or malfunction in the 
vehicle design, especially if the defect could have been 
prevented or fixed by an alternative design.  The cost-benefit 
(or risk-utility) argument will not depend on whether the at-
fault autonomous vehicle is be tter overall than a traditional 
vehicle, but whether the autono mous vehicle technology could 
have been tweaked to make it safer.  In principle, the cost-
benefit analysis is based on the knowledge that the manufacturer had when the vehicle was manufactured.  In 
practice, however, hindsight from  the accident that actually 
occurred will inevitably provide new insights into how the technology could have been made safer, which will then be 
imputed to the manufacturer.  Given the complexity of an 
autonomous system, a plaintiff’s expert will almost always be able to testify (with the benefit of hindsight) that the 
manufacturer should have known about and adopted the 
alternative, safer design. 
The manufacturer cannot possibly anticipate every 
possible scenario the vehicle will encounter, especially for a 
technology as complex as autono mous driving systems.  For 
 
 46. Bittner v. Am. Honda Motor Co., 533 N.W.2d 476 (Wisc. 1995) 
(overturning verdict for defense based on improper admission of comparative risk evidence); Kava v. Am. Honda Motor Co., 48 P.3d 1170, 1172 (Alaska 2002) 
(upholding exclusion of comparative risk  data in defendant’s case-in-chief). 
 47. Hulmes v. Honda Motor Co., 960 F. Supp. 844, 864 (D.N.J. 1997); Kava , 
48 P.3d at 1174. 
 48. Kava , 48 P.3d at 1173–74. MARCHANT FINAL 11/14/2012   12:42  AM 
1334 SANTA CLARA LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 52 
the situations it does anticipate, the manufacturer can 
usually design the system to minimize the risk of an accident.  The problem is that most accidents will result from situations 
that the manufacturer or designer did not anticipate.  This 
will open the manufacturer to second-guessing by the plaintiff’s expert that an adjustment would have provided a 
safer alternative system that would have avoided the accident 
in question.
49  The manufacturer will almost always lose the 
cost-benefit argument, conducted in hindsight in the 
litigation context, when it focu ses at the micro-scale between 
slightly different versions of th e autonomous system.  This is 
because the cost of not implementing the potential 
improvement will usually be seve re—the loss of one or more 
lives or other serious injury, compared to the relatively small cost of the marginal improvement that might have prevented 
the accident.
50  The technology is potentially doomed if there 
are a significant number of such cases, because the liability burden on the manufacturer may be prohibitive of further 
development.  Thus, even though an autonomous vehicle may 
be safer overall than a conventional vehicle, it will shift the responsibility for accidents, and hence liability, from drivers 
to manufacturers.  The shift will push the manufacturer away 
from the socially-optimal outcome—to develop the autonomous vehicle.
51 
One final aspect of relative risk in liability 
determinations will be the jurors’ (and to a lesser extent, judges’) perceptions about autonomous vehicles.  Liability 
determinations always involve an element of jury emotion 
and ethical response.
52  It is not clear how juries will respond 
to autonomous vehicles, espe cially with hindsight bias after  
the vehicle has been in an accident that has injured the 
plaintiff sitting before them.  Some jurors may value the 
 
 49. If the accident was caused by an aspect of the autonomous vehicle that 
could not easily have been foreseen or fixed, and which involved a tradeoff 
inherent in moving to the safer autonomous design, the argument against 
liability will be much stronger.  50. Of course, from a prospective perspective, there are almost an infinite 
number of improvements that could be made to slightly improve safety.  In 
many cases, these improvements will only appear justified after  an accident has 
occurred.  As is often stated, hindsight is perfect. 
 51. See K
ALRA ET AL ., supra  note 21, at 30. 
 52. See  W. Kip Viscusi, Jurors, Judges, and the Mistreatment of Risk by the 
Courts , 30 J.  LEGAL STUD. 107, 135 (2001); Erica Beecher-Monas, Heuristics, 
Biases, and the Importance of Gatekeeping , 2003 M ICH. STATE L. REV. 987. MARCHANT FINAL 11/14/2012   12:42  AM 
2012] AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES & LIABILITY  1335 
effort made by manufacturers in producing a complex 
technology product that provid es overall safety and other 
benefits.  Alternatively, juro rs could perceive autonomous 
vehicles as a premature, and even reckless, foray that 
deserves to be soundly punished and deterred.53  T h e  l a t t e r  
reaction may be even stronger in the context of a lawsuit over 
an accident allegedly caused by an autonomous vehicle.  
There is some evidence that lay persons composing a jury are suspicious of unfamiliar and exotic-edge technologies, 
regardless of their actual probability of causing harm.
54  This 
research could be a concern fo r manufacturers of all novel 
high-tech products, including autonomous vehicles.  
Moreover, a phenomenon called “betrayal aversion” finds that 
people often have a strong emotional reaction against a safety innovation that actually causes harm, even if the net effect of 
the innovation is to improve safety.
55  For example, the jury 
verdict against GM for its C/K pickup case, involving an award of over $100 million in punitive damages, suggests 
that juries are prone to outrage against a high-tech 
manufacturer because of the increased risk created by one type of accident This result was reached even though the 
overall crashworthiness of the vehicle was equivalent or 
superior to most other vehicles on the road.
56 
IV. L EGAL AND POLICY PROTECTIONS  
The above analysis suggests that liability may present a 
serious barrier for the production and development of 
autonomous vehicles, even if the products are socially 
beneficial overall.  The shift in liability from drivers to manufacturers, notwithstanding the overall decrease in total 
accidents (and liability), may deter manufacturers from 
 
 53. Beiker, supra  note 21, at 1152 (“Overreaction [by juries] is a clear 
danger . . . .”); Moore & Lu, supra  note 1, at 5 (consumers will expect 
autonomous vehicles to function as sa fely or safer than driver-controlled 
vehicles).  54. Paul Slovic & Ellen Peters, Risk Perception and Effect , 15 C
URRENT 
DIRECTIONS IN PSYCHOL . SCI. 322 (2006); Yuval Rottenstreich & Ran Kivetz, 
On Decision Making Without Likelihood Judgment , 101 O RGANIZATIONAL 
BEHAV . & HUM. DECISION PROCESSES  74 (2006). 
 55. Jonathan J. Koehler and Andrew D. Gershoff, Betrayal Aversion: When 
Agents of Protection Become Agents of Harm , 90 ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAV . & 
HUM. DECISION PROCESSES  244 (2003). 
 56. Id. MARCHANT FINAL 11/14/2012   12:42  AM 
1336 SANTA CLARA LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 52 
developing autonomous vehicle technologies.57  Moreover, 
while manufacturers may be able to transfer some of those costs back to drivers through hi gher vehicle prices, the risk 
discounting that consumers apply, in which they undervalue 
products that reduce future risks, will prevent consumers 
from investing in such products at a socially optimal level.
58 
There are some possible legal and policy tools that may 
help protect manufacturers from liability.  One such tool within the litigation system is the assumption of risk defense.  
Outside the litigation system, another tool is the pursuit of 
legislation that provides immunity or other defenses to manufacturers.  Legislation could help minimize liability, or 
alternatively, the National Highway Safety Traffic 
Administration (“NHTSA”) could promulgate regulations that expressly preempt state tort actions. 
A. Assumption of Risk Defense 
The assumption of risk defense provides that a product 
user who knowingly accepts the risks of a potentially 
hazardous product assumes some or all of the responsibility 
for any harm that may befall them from use of the product.
59  
Such a defense requires that the product user understand 
and willingly assume the risks.60  Thus, for such a defense to 
apply to autonomous vehicles , the manufacturer would have 
to fully disclose the potential risks of the vehicle, including 
the likely failure modes and some approximate sense of their 
probability.  Such a defense would be stronger if the driver of an autonomous vehicle signed a written waiver accepting the 
risk of the vehicle.  Even in  these circumstances, however, 
courts often refuse to recognize the defense.  Assumption of risk has been merged into the comparative negligence 
analysis and is no longer recognized as a separate defense in 
many states.  The recent Restatement (Third) of Apportionment of Liability rejects a general non-contractual 
 
 57. A YERS , supra  note 24, at 2. 
 58. Id. at 27–28. 
 59. Eric A. Feldman & Alison Stein, Assuming the Risk: Tort Law, Policy, 
and Politics on the Slippery Slopes , 59 D EPAUL L. REV. 259 (2010). 
 60. E.g. , Murphy v. Steeplechase Amuse. Co., 166 N.E. 173, 174 (N.Y. 1929) 
(holding that riders on an amusement ride assume the obvious risk of the attraction); Chepkevich v. Hidden Valle y Resort, L.P., 2 A.3d 1174, 1186 (Pa. 
2010) (holding that a skier assumed risk of injury from ski lift). MARCHANT FINAL 11/14/2012   12:42  AM 
2012] AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES & LIABILITY  1337 
assumption of risk defense.61  Moreover, even if the defense 
does apply, it would only extend to the owner and possibly passengers of the autonomous vehicle, not to the occupants of 
the other vehicle. 
B. Legislative Protections 
Another line of defense for autonomous vehicle 
manufacturers would be legislation at either the federal or 
state level that would protec t against, or limit, liability.
62  The 
rationale for such legislative intervention would be supported 
by the fact that autonomous vehicles represent a socially 
beneficial technology that may be hindered by real or perceived liability concerns.  Of course, providing such 
legislative protection from liability has its downside—it 
diminishes, if not eliminates, the incentives for manufacturers to make marginal improvements in the safety 
of their products in order to prevent liability.  The net value 
and hence wisdom of such legislative interventions will therefore depend on how they are constructed and the 
balance they strike between these positive and negative 
incentives. 
While it is relatively rare for legislatures to intervene to 
protect specific technologies or  products from liability, there 
are some precedents regarding comparative technologies.  At the federal level, Congress ad opted legislation severely 
restricting the form and amount of liability that courts could 
impose from Y2K-related problems.
63  S i m i l a r l y ,  C o n g r e s s  
enacted the Price-Anderson Nuclear Industries Indemnity Act 
in 1957 to protect the nuclear  industry from excessive 
liability from nuclear accidents.64  The Oil Pollution Act of 
 
 61. R ESTATEMENT (THIRD ) OF TORTS : APPORTIONMENT OF LIABILITY  § 2 cmt. 
f (2000). 
 62. See  Wallach, supra  note 29, at 194, 196 (discussing incentives of 
autonomous product manufacturers to seek legislation providing liability 
protection); Calo, supra  note 14, at 601–09 (proposing limited immunity from 
liability for manufacturers of autonomous systems).  63. Year 2000 Responsibility and Readiness Act, Pub. Law No: 106-37 
(1999) (limits Y2K liability in two ways: (a) by limiting it to proportional rather 
than joint and several liability; and (b) by requiring clear and convincing evidence of damage and limiting the amount of damages to the lesser of 
$250,000 or three-times compensatory damages).  Y2K refers to the potential 
problems that were anticipated to result  from computers failing to accurately 
interpret the date when the calendar reached the year 2000. 
 64. 42 U.S.C. § 2210 (2006). MARCHANT FINAL 11/14/2012   12:42  AM 
1338 SANTA CLARA LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 52 
1990 created the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund, which sets 
caps on liability for oil spills.65  The Public Readiness and 
Emergency Preparedness Act of  2005 provides drug makers 
with immunity from liability for injuries caused by vaccines 
during declared public health  emergencies (e.g., avian flu 
epidemic).66  The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act was 
enacted in 1986 to limit liability for childhood vaccines, in 
response to concerns that liab ility would force many suppliers 
of such vaccines out of business.67  The General Aviation 
Revitalization Act of 1994 immunized manufacturers of small 
planes and small plane parts from liability for a period of eighteen years in response to the potential for widespread 
bankruptcy in that industry.
68 
At the state level, several le gislatures have adopted laws 
to limit liability in a number of different arenas.  For 
example, many states have adopted laws that cap allowable 
damages in medical malpractice actions, largely in an effort to encourage physicians to cont inue to practice medicine in 
their states and to lower the overall cost of health care.
69  
Similarly, almost all states have taken the initiative to place some limit on the amount of punitive damages that their 
courts can award.
70  These efforts illustrate states’ propensity 
to ameliorate the liability concerns faced by vulnerable, but promising, technologies like autonomous vehicles. 
C. State Preemption 
A third possible protection for manufacturers of 
autonomous vehicles is federal preemption of state tort 
actions.  In particular, a Federal Motor Vehicle Safety 
Standard, (“FMVSS”) adopted by NHTSA, may preempt state tort actions that are in conflict with the standard.  There are 
 
 65. 33 U.S.C. § 2704 (2006). 
 66. 42 U.S.C. § 329 (2006). 
 67. 2 U.S.C. §§ 300aa-1–300aa-4 (2006). 
 68. Pub. L. No. 103-298, § 2(a), 108 Stat. 1552 (1994) (codified at 49 U.S.C. § 
40101 notes (2006) (cited in Calo, supra  note 14, at 603 n.220). 
 69. F RED J. HELLINGER & WILLIAM E. ENCINOSA , U.S.  DEP’T OF HEALTH & 
HUMAN SERVS ., A GENCY FOR HEALTHCARE RESEARCH AND QUALITY : THE 
IMPACT OF STATE LAWS LIMITING MALPRACTICE AWARDS ON THE GEOGRAPHIC 
DISTRIBUTION OF PHYSICIANS 3 (2003), available at http://www.ahrq.gov/ 
research/tortcaps/tortcaps.htm.  70. Punitive Damages Reform , A
MERICAN TORT REFORM ASSOCIATION , 
http://www.atra.org/issues/punitive-damages- reform (last visited Apr. 20, 2012). MARCHANT FINAL 11/14/2012   12:42  AM 
2012] AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES & LIABILITY  1339 
two obstacles to this protection.  First, NHTSA has not 
adopted FMVSSs specific to autonomous vehicles.  It is conceivable, however, that the agency may adopt such 
standards in the future if autonomous vehicles are likely to 
become prevalent and raise unique safety issues.  The second obstacle is that most FMVSSs do not preempt state tort 
actions.
71  Courts have found preemption only in the narrow 
context where the state tort acti on actually interferes with 
the achievement of the objective of the federal standard.72  In 
construing the federal govern ment’s objective behind a 
FMVSS, the courts looked at the regulation’s history, NHTSA’s contemporaneous explanation of the regulation’s 
purpose, and the agency’s current view of its preemptive 
effect.
73  Thus, if the agency so intended, NHTSA may be able 
to write and explain future safety standards for autonomous 
vehicles in a way that preempt ed some, or all, state tort 
actions.74 
CONCLUSION  
Autonomous vehicles will increase the safety of vehicle 
travel by reducing vehicle collisions.  Ironically, autonomous 
vehicles are likely to increase  the liability exposure of vehicle 
manufacturers.  Autonomous vehicles will shift the responsibility for avoiding accidents from the driver to the 
vehicle manufacturer.  Although the autonomous vehicle is 
expected to result in a net decrease in the number of accidents, it will create new modes of failure that will be 
attributed to the vehicle.  These failures are likely to generate 
lawsuits against the vehicle manufacturer and possibly manufacturers of components of the autonomous system.  
 
 71. See, e.g. , Williamson v. Mazda Motor of Am., Inc., 131 S. Ct. 1131 (2011)  
(holding that  the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard, giving auto 
manufacturers the choice of installing either simple lap belts or lap-and-shoulder belts on rear inner seats, did no t pre-empt state tort claims seeking to 
impose liability on manufacturer for installing simple lap belts on the rear inner 
seat of a minivan).  72. Geier v. American Honda Motor Co., 529 U.S. 861 (2000) (preempting 
state tort action alleging the failure to install air bags when federal standard 
only requires installation of air bags in some vehicles of the applicable model year). 
 73. Id. at 875–85. 
 74. It may also be possible to address some of the liability concerns discussed in this Article through innovative insurance policies, but such ideas 
are discussed elsewhere in this symposium issue. MARCHANT FINAL 11/14/2012   12:42  AM 
1340 SANTA CLARA LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 52 
Plaintiffs will target manufacture rs because they will often be 
most at fault for the malfunction that caused the accident and they have the deepest pockets of all involved parties.  
Manufacturers of autonomous vehicles are likely to argue 
that their “fault” should be evaluated in a comparative context, with credit given to the net safety benefits of the 
autonomous vehicles.  The history of such arguments made by 
manufacturers of other, safer, products suggest that this comparative or net risk assessmen t is unlikely to succeed.  If 
that prediction comes true, and if autonomous vehicles have a 
significant rate of failure (likely in the initial years at least), liability may be a barrier that blocks the introduction of this 
socially beneficial new technology. 
If this problem is serious enough, it may require greater 
use of an assumption of risk defense, legislative liability 
protection, or preemption, to ensure autonomous vehicles are 
not unduly impeded by liability concerns.  Of course, one disadvantage of these approaches is that by immunizing the 
internalization of accident costs from vehicle manufacturers, 
they may reduce the pressure on manufacturers to make incremental improvements in th e safety of their autonomous 
systems.  Notwithstanding this limitation, it may be better to 
have autonomous vehicles sooner rather than later even if they are imperfect, given that even imperfect autonomous 
vehicles will be safer than ve hicles on the road today. 